ByteportConcepts.adoc, before:

= Byteport Concepts
Byteport basic concepts documentation.
v0.1, 2016-02-23
:library: Asciidoctor
:idprefix:
:numbered:
:imagesdir: images
:toc: manual
:toc-title: pass:[<h2>Table of Contents</h2>]
:css-signature: demo
:toc-placement: preamble
//:max-width: 800px
//:doctype: book
//:sectids!:

// Do NOT remove this line!
*NOTE: THIS DOCUMENTATION IS A DRAFT*

This document covers the basic concepts of Byteport and serves as a basic introduction with screenshots and
a guide on how to successfully manage systems (IoT, embedded equipment etc.) using Byteport.

This documentation does *not* contain programming or API usage examples, for such things you should instead look
to the link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API Documentation].

Any questions regarding this document can be sent to contact@byteport.se.

// AsciiDoc resources:
//
// Cheat sheet: https://powerman.name/doc/asciidoc
// Examples:    https://github.com/opendevise/asciidoc-samples/blob/master/demo.adoc

== Introduction
Byteport is a middleware platform service that aims to solve a number of key issues related to the expanding IoT
phenomenon, mainly but not limited to:

* Device organisation and management
* Data storage
* Web service exposure of IoT data
* Firmware management
* Device anomaly detection
* Application development

Byteport has an intuitive web-based GUI where a developer or operator can define and manage device behaviour.

image:byteport_overview.gif["Byteport overview", width=600, align="center"]

=== API only or Full Service?
Any person could get started with Byteport by reading this document and the link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API specification].
But for customers with further needs or with no prior knowledge to systems integration using HTTPS services, Byteport
is especially suiting since we can help customers with full-stack solutions using our network of *talented
embedded/IoT engineers* and project managers. Don´t hesitate to mailto:contact@byteport.se[contact us] and tell us about
your IoT project needs and ideas.

=== On site installations
Byteport is not an internet-only service, but can also *deployed locally* with full functionality and in scale adapted
to your business needs. Contact mailto:contact@byteport.se[Byteport sales] for more information regarding this kind of set-up.

== Getting started
You can get started with Byteport even without a single connected Device, since it is so simple to emulate a device
by simply making a call to the Byteport HTTPS API by referencing a dummy device, or you can even use the
link:http://www.byteport.se/generator/[device simulator application] we provide.

Follow the steps below to get a feel for how to work with Byteport:

.*1) Sign up*
You and your team members should link:http://www.byteport.se/home/#register[register a personal user].

.*2) Log in*
Look around, but there is not much to do before you create a namespace and register a few devices.

.*3) Create a namespace*
You need a link:#namespace[namespace]
before you can register any devices, as devices belong to a single namespace. You create one
(or a few) namespace per project. Do that link:http://www.byteport.se/manager/namespaces/[now].

image:create_namespace1.gif["Create a Namespace", width=600, align="center"]

Now try link:http://www.byteport.se/manager/namespaces/[list your namespaces], your newly registered namespace should be in
the list. Should a colleague have added you to one of his/hers namespace, it will also appear in this list.

.*4) Register a Device*
While you can start pumping data to Byteport even without registering a single device, you should definitely register
your devices and unlock the potential of Byteport. Read up on how to name a device properly in a link:#names[section below].

image:register_device1.gif["Device registration",width=600]

Note that in the example above, a custom link:#device_types[device type] is used. You can add one using the provided link in
the registration form, as seen. Device types is used to describe your devices and their data series. You can read more
on that subject link:#device_types[below].

.*5a) Connect a device to Byteport*
If you have a physical device you want to monitor - now is a good time to do that. You could start with checking our
link:https://github.com/iGW/byteport-api[API client examples on GitHub] and of course have a look at the
link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API specification]. You know what, your laptop or workstation will do just fine as a Device
you can monitor even if you do not have an embedded device to fiddle with.

.*5b) Fake a connected Device*
If you do *not* have any physical devices to connect, you could simply make a call to the HTTPS API
(for alternatives see: <<Example device applications>>). That is as easy
as copying the link below to a new browser tab and replace the placeholders with real values. You will have to enable
API Write method *Allow write by HTTP GET* and at the same time get the API Write key and replace it in the place holder
in the below example:

[source]
http://api.byteport.se/api/v1/timeseries/[NAMESPACE NAME]/[DEVICE UID]/?_key=NAMESPACEKEY&word=hello

This call will store 'hello' mapped to a field name called 'word'. It should look something like the example below:

image:device2.gif["A Device has stored the word hello",width=800]

.Undefined data
NOTE: Byteport will warn that some data field was not defined properly. You open up the device type page using the link
from the device (under *Type* to the left) view, this is done in step 8).

.*6) Add a field definition*
Add a field definition to your device type to describe your data properly, you can add a description a unit and a unit
symbol for use in graphs, data analysis exports etc. You only need to do this once per device type.

image:add_field_definition.gif["Add a field definition to a device type",width=800]

.*7) Invite your colleagues*
A namespace can be shared with other users. You can do that by selecting your newly created namespace and then clicking on
the *security* tab, add a user by typing in the Byteport username or email of the user you wish to add. A person can
be invited to use the namespace either as a User or as an Owner. The only difference is that owners can add new persons
to work with the namespace.

image:security_tab1.gif["Namespace security",width=600]

== Key concepts

=== Names
At the heart of Byteport are the time series data that are continuously stored from
your devices. All data are stored vs a unique key called a Byteport GUID. The key
is defined like this:

`*[Namespace name].[Device UID].[Field name]*`

Example, logging the speed of a mining cart uses this valid name

*megamine.cart-44.Speed1*

The names used in the Byteport GUID must all adhere to the following rules:

- Must be between 2 characters and 32 characters long.
- Can not contain other characters than: 0-9, a-z,A-Z, dash, underscore and colon.
- Can not start with dash (-) or underscore (_).

In addition, a namespace created by a user must be longer than 6 characters.

=== Class relationships
The developer who are used to model problems using object relations can see how the core model of Byteport are
structured in the figure below.

image:byteport_core_model.gif["The core concepts/classes of Byteport",width=600]

== Namespace
A namespace basically be thought of as a project. It could however be useful to also create a namespace depending
on the phase or use-case of the devices. For example the same project could employ two namespaces, one for development
and one for the production environment, such as *roadstar* and *roadstar-dev*.

Note that you should *create a new namespace* if you re-use equipment in a new project. If can´t change namespace name
you should at least change the UIDs of the devices, else the data from the old project will be indistinguishable from
the data from the new series, and you must keep track of the dates and fetch data accordingly etc.


=== Security

=== Device types

=== Field definitions
==== Numbers
==== Strings
==== Objects


== Devices

=== Device Control

The Device Control (DC) system defines a generic way to control devices that
enables <<Byteport Manager>> to auto-generate a web view to manage the device.

This is based on the concept of *state synchronization* - meaning a change to a property from
the (auto-generated) web view will immediately be reflected to an identical property
on the remote device you want to control. The vice-versa is also true - a change on the
device will be reflected to the web-view. The delay for this operation is less than 0.15s
and most of the latancy comes from the network.

image:dc_manager_example_2016-08.png[title="Beta of the autogenerated control view",width=1000]

At its core the DC system is a list of *key->value Properties*. In MVC terminology
the Device is both controller and model and
Byteport manager becomes one (but not necessarily the only) view.

The history of properties shall not matter (which is in contrast to dataseries where
the history is the whole point). In other words: The configuration state of the
device should be fully determined by the current values of the properties.
Restoring a state is then just a matter of restoring all properties.

[source]
Example:
Case1: User sets the property "Fan-speed" to 1, then 2, then 3 in rapid succession.
Case2: User sets the property "Fan-speed" to 3.

In both cases the device should behave identically afterwards. In Case1
it is even possible (but not guaranteed) that Byteport throws away the first
two values "1" and "2" and only sends the last "3" to the device.

This makes it easy to generate a config-file. Just save all Properties.
To load the config, just restore all Properties from the file.


==== Property datatypes ====

A Property has a few predetermined types (int, float, enum, string) and a few
hints (such as min, max for numbers) that helps a view such as byteport manager
to genenerate suitable controls automatically. See the libbyteport documentation
for details.


==== Property types ====

The Property discussed so far has been the SettingProperty used for configuration.
There are in total three flavors of Properties

* SettingProperty
** _Description:_ Used for settings. The only Property that is saved to config files.
** _View/Client:_ R/W
** _Device:_ R/W

* StatusProperty
** _Description:_ Used by the device to show status information such as
                "current temprature". Will not be saved to any configuration file.
** _View/Client:_ Ro
** _Device:_ R/W

* ActionProperty
** _Description:_ Used to make something happen exactly once. Cannot be cached
                and must be write through. Will typically cause a callback in
                the device to execute exactly once.
                Cannot be saved to a config file because it has no value after
                it has been completed.
** _View/Client:_ Wr
** _Device:_ Ro


==== Property hierarchies ====

These Properties can be organised in tree-hierachies which is useful for
organisation. If a special web-application (view) is created, some values
may have special meaning to the app. In such case it can be convenient to
group them together in a group that is frozen while other general Properties
can be added at will and just automagically show up in the auto-generated manager
view for instance.


=== Time series data

=== Field configurations

=== Messaging

Defenition and version handling of such propertis is still TBD as of 2016-08.
Somthing similar to the data-series Field-Definitions

=== Example device applications

* *Javascript generator* - http://byteport.se/generator/
** Javascript application that uses the HTTP interface to inject data.
* *ByteportGUI* FIXME: Link to byteportGUI repo
** QT-Gui intended to be able to simulate any kind of device. Very useful for
various tests and injecting test-data
* *Skeleton Example* FIXME: Link to simplest possible skeleton example
** Minimalistic example which forms a good starting point for writing custom
   applications.


== Byteport Manager
The link:https://www.byteport.se/manager/[Byteport Manager] is the GUI in which you define your namespaces, devices
and data series. Your devices will start feeding data to Byteport and you can then build smart work flows for your data
and build useful applications on this foundation you have created.

image:device1.gif["A piece of the Byteport device manager.",width=600]

_A piece of the Byteport device manager_


== Operations

=== Alarms and conditions

=== Logs

=== Data analysis

=== Reports

== IoT Know-how



== API



== Applications

=== Byteport Integrated

=== External Web application

=== Native Mobile Application

==== Android

==== iOS

==== Windows


== List of abbreviations
* DC - <<Device Control>>

//[[img-sunset]]
//image::sunset.jpg[caption="Figure 1: ", title="A mountain sunset", alt="Sunset", width="300", height="200", link="http://www.flickr.com/photos/javh/5448336655"]

Commit message:

Added screenshot and explaining text for the DC generated gui from google docs.

ByteportConcepts.adoc, after:

= Byteport Concepts
Byteport basic concepts documentation.
v0.1, 2016-02-23
:library: Asciidoctor
:idprefix:
:numbered:
:imagesdir: images
:toc: manual
:toc-title: pass:[<h2>Table of Contents</h2>]
:css-signature: demo
:toc-placement: preamble
//:max-width: 800px
//:doctype: book
//:sectids!:

// Do NOT remove this line!
*NOTE: THIS DOCUMENTATION IS A DRAFT*

This document covers the basic concepts of Byteport and serves as a basic introduction with screenshots and
a guide on how to successfully manage systems (IoT, embedded equipment etc.) using Byteport.

This documentation does *not* contain programming or API usage examples, for such things you should instead look
to the link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API Documentation].

Any questions regarding this document can be sent to contact@byteport.se.

// AsciiDoc resources:
//
// Cheat sheet: https://powerman.name/doc/asciidoc
// Examples:    https://github.com/opendevise/asciidoc-samples/blob/master/demo.adoc

== Introduction
Byteport is a middleware platform service that aims to solve a number of key issues related to the expanding IoT
phenomenon, mainly but not limited to:

* Device organisation and management
* Data storage
* Web service exposure of IoT data
* Firmware management
* Device anomaly detection
* Application development

Byteport has an intuitive web-based GUI where a developer or operator can define and manage device behaviour.

image:byteport_overview.gif["Byteport overview", width=600, align="center"]

=== API only or Full Service?
Any person could get started with Byteport by reading this document and the link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API specification].
But for customers with further needs or with no prior knowledge to systems integration using HTTPS services, Byteport
is especially suiting since we can help customers with full-stack solutions using our network of *talented
embedded/IoT engineers* and project managers. Don´t hesitate to mailto:contact@byteport.se[contact us] and tell us about
your IoT project needs and ideas.

=== On site installations
Byteport is not an internet-only service, but can also *deployed locally* with full functionality and in scale adapted
to your business needs. Contact mailto:contact@byteport.se[Byteport sales] for more information regarding this kind of set-up.

== Getting started
You can get started with Byteport even without a single connected Device, since it is so simple to emulate a device
by simply making a call to the Byteport HTTPS API by referencing a dummy device, or you can even use the
link:http://www.byteport.se/generator/[device simulator application] we provide.

Follow the steps below to get a feel for how to work with Byteport:

.*1) Sign up*
You and your team members should link:http://www.byteport.se/home/#register[register a personal user].

.*2) Log in*
Look around, but there is not much to do before you create a namespace and register a few devices.

.*3) Create a namespace*
You need a link:#namespace[namespace]
before you can register any devices, as devices belong to a single namespace. You create one
(or a few) namespace per project. Do that link:http://www.byteport.se/manager/namespaces/[now].

image:create_namespace1.gif["Create a Namespace", width=600, align="center"]

Now try link:http://www.byteport.se/manager/namespaces/[list your namespaces], your newly registered namespace should be in
the list. Should a colleague have added you to one of his/hers namespace, it will also appear in this list.

.*4) Register a Device*
While you can start pumping data to Byteport even without registering a single device, you should definitely register
your devices and unlock the potential of Byteport. Read up on how to name a device properly in a link:#names[section below].

image:register_device1.gif["Device registration",width=600]

Note that in the example above, a custom link:#device_types[device type] is used. You can add one using the provided link in
the registration form, as seen. Device types is used to describe your devices and their data series. You can read more
on that subject link:#device_types[below].

.*5a) Connect a device to Byteport*
If you have a physical device you want to monitor - now is a good time to do that. You could start with checking our
link:https://github.com/iGW/byteport-api[API client examples on GitHub] and of course have a look at the
link:APIv1.adoc[Byteport API specification]. You know what, your laptop or workstation will do just fine as a Device
you can monitor even if you do not have an embedded device to fiddle with.

.*5b) Fake a connected Device*
If you do *not* have any physical devices to connect, you could simply make a call to the HTTPS API
(for alternatives see: <<Example device applications>>). That is as easy
as copying the link below to a new browser tab and replace the placeholders with real values. You will have to enable
API Write method *Allow write by HTTP GET* and at the same time get the API Write key and replace it in the place holder
in the below example:

[source]
http://api.byteport.se/api/v1/timeseries/[NAMESPACE NAME]/[DEVICE UID]/?_key=NAMESPACEKEY&word=hello

This call will store 'hello' mapped to a field name called 'word'. It should look something like the example below:

image:device2.gif["A Device has stored the word hello",width=800]

.Undefined data
NOTE: Byteport will warn that some data field was not defined properly. You open up the device type page using the link
from the device (under *Type* to the left) view, this is done in step 8).

.*6) Add a field definition*
Add a field definition to your device type to describe your data properly, you can add a description a unit and a unit
symbol for use in graphs, data analysis exports etc. You only need to do this once per device type.

image:add_field_definition.gif["Add a field definition to a device type",width=800]

.*7) Invite your colleagues*
A namespace can be shared with other users. You can do that by selecting your newly created namespace and then clicking on
the *security* tab, add a user by typing in the Byteport username or email of the user you wish to add. A person can
be invited to use the namespace either as a User or as an Owner. The only difference is that owners can add new persons
to work with the namespace.

image:security_tab1.gif["Namespace security",width=600]

== Key concepts

=== Names
At the heart of Byteport are the time series data that are continuously stored from
your devices. All data are stored vs a unique key called a Byteport GUID. The key
is defined like this:

`*[Namespace name].[Device UID].[Field name]*`

Example, logging the speed of a mining cart uses this valid name

*megamine.cart-44.Speed1*

The names used in the Byteport GUID must all adhere to the following rules:

- Must be between 2 characters and 32 characters long.
- Can not contain other characters than: 0-9, a-z,A-Z, dash, underscore and colon.
- Can not start with dash (-) or underscore (_).

In addition, a namespace created by a user must be longer than 6 characters.

=== Class relationships
The developer who are used to model problems using object relations can see how the core model of Byteport are
structured in the figure below.

image:byteport_core_model.gif["The core concepts/classes of Byteport",width=600]

== Namespace
A namespace basically be thought of as a project. It could however be useful to also create a namespace depending
on the phase or use-case of the devices. For example the same project could employ two namespaces, one for development
and one for the production environment, such as *roadstar* and *roadstar-dev*.

Note that you should *create a new namespace* if you re-use equipment in a new project. If can´t change namespace name
you should at least change the UIDs of the devices, else the data from the old project will be indistinguishable from
the data from the new series, and you must keep track of the dates and fetch data accordingly etc.


=== Security

=== Device types

=== Field definitions
==== Numbers
==== Strings
==== Objects


== Devices

=== Device Control
Note: Not yet available on the main Byteport (www.byteport.se) instance.

The Device Control (DC) system defines a generic way to control devices that
enables <<Byteport Manager>> to auto-generate a web view to manage the device.

This is based on the concept of *state synchronization* - meaning a change to a property from
the (auto-generated) web view will immediately be reflected to an identical property
on the remote device you want to control. The vice-versa is also true - a change on the
device will be reflected to the web-view. The delay for this operation is less than 0.15s
and most of the latancy comes from the network.

image:byteport_dc_gdocs.png[title="The generated Graphical user interface based on a Spreadsheet document.",width=1000]

The above screen shot shows the source document (Google Docs, but could be a standard
Excel spreadsheet)  and the generated Byteport Manger user interface.
The definition is sent to Byteport by the Devices (based on generated code) and the
Byteport Manager can generate the corresponding live user interface, note how the "tabs"
of the spreadsheet matches that of the Manager, even the order is preserved.

At its core the DC system is a list of *key->value Properties*. In MVC terminology
the Device is both controller and model and
Byteport manager becomes one (but not necessarily the only) view.

The history of properties shall not matter (which is in contrast to dataseries where
the history is the whole point). In other words: The configuration state of the
device should be fully determined by the current values of the properties.
Restoring a state is then just a matter of restoring all properties.

[source]
Example:
Case1: User sets the property "Fan-speed" to 1, then 2, then 3 in rapid succession.
Case2: User sets the property "Fan-speed" to 3.

In both cases the device should behave identically afterwards. In Case1
it is even possible (but not guaranteed) that Byteport throws away the first
two values "1" and "2" and only sends the last "3" to the device.

This makes it easy to generate a config-file. Just save all Properties.
To load the config, just restore all Properties from the file.


==== Property datatypes ====

A Property has a few predetermined types (int, float, enum, string) and a few
hints (such as min, max for numbers) that helps a view such as byteport manager
to genenerate suitable controls automatically. See the libbyteport documentation
for details.


==== Property types ====

The Property discussed so far has been the SettingProperty used for configuration.
There are in total three flavors of Properties

* SettingProperty
** _Description:_ Used for settings. The only Property that is saved to config files.
** _View/Client:_ R/W
** _Device:_ R/W

* StatusProperty
** _Description:_ Used by the device to show status information such as
                "current temprature". Will not be saved to any configuration file.
** _View/Client:_ Ro
** _Device:_ R/W

* ActionProperty
** _Description:_ Used to make something happen exactly once. Cannot be cached
                and must be write through. Will typically cause a callback in
                the device to execute exactly once.
                Cannot be saved to a config file because it has no value after
                it has been completed.
** _View/Client:_ Wr
** _Device:_ Ro


==== Property hierarchies ====

These Properties can be organised in tree-hierachies which is useful for
organisation. If a special web-application (view) is created, some values
may have special meaning to the app. In such case it can be convenient to
group them together in a group that is frozen while other general Properties
can be added at will and just automagically show up in the auto-generated manager
view for instance.


=== Time series data

=== Field configurations

=== Messaging

Defenition and version handling of such propertis is still TBD as of 2016-08.
Somthing similar to the data-series Field-Definitions

=== Example device applications

* *Javascript generator* - http://byteport.se/generator/
** Javascript application that uses the HTTP interface to inject data.
* *ByteportGUI* FIXME: Link to byteportGUI repo
** QT-Gui intended to be able to simulate any kind of device. Very useful for
various tests and injecting test-data
* *Skeleton Example* FIXME: Link to simplest possible skeleton example
** Minimalistic example which forms a good starting point for writing custom
   applications.


== Byteport Manager
The link:https://www.byteport.se/manager/[Byteport Manager] is the GUI in which you define your namespaces, devices
and data series. Your devices will start feeding data to Byteport and you can then build smart work flows for your data
and build useful applications on this foundation you have created.

image:device1.gif["A piece of the Byteport device manager.",width=600]

_A piece of the Byteport device manager_


== Operations

=== Alarms and conditions

=== Logs

=== Data analysis

=== Reports

== IoT Know-how



== API



== Applications

=== Byteport Integrated

=== External Web application

=== Native Mobile Application

==== Android

==== iOS

==== Windows


== List of abbreviations
* DC - <<Device Control>>

//[[img-sunset]]
//image::sunset.jpg[caption="Figure 1: ", title="A mountain sunset", alt="Sunset", width="300", height="200", link="http://www.flickr.com/photos/javh/5448336655"]
